---
layout: distill
title: Jack of all, master of none
description: About the charmingly simple beauty of the Finite Difference Method
date: 2021-06-14

authors:
  - name: Patrick Zimbrod
    affiliations:
      name: Applied Computer Science, Augsburg
  

bibliography: 2021-06-17-numerics.bib

# Below is an example of injecting additional post-specific styles.
# If you use this post as a template, delete this _styles block.
_styles: >
  .fake-img {
    background: #bbb;
    border: 1px solid rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
    box-shadow: 0 0px 4px rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
    margin-bottom: 12px;
  }
  .fake-img p {
    font-family: monospace;
    color: white;
    text-align: left;
    margin: 12px 0;
    text-align: center;
    font-size: 16px;
  }

---

This technique can be regarded as the most "primitive" alternative to solving this type of problems and dates back to its origins more than 100 years ago by Richardson <d-cite key="richardsonIXApproximateArithmetical1911"></d-cite>: The idea is as simple as charming: You look at the posed problem on a given domain only at discrete points, calculate the differentials between them and interpolate the rest. So the continuous differentials would become:

$$
\frac{\partial f}{\partial x} \approx \frac{\Delta f}{\Delta x} = \frac{f(x_{n-1}) - f(x_n)}{x_{n-1} - x_n}
$$

Now you'd be right to ask whether that wasn't a little simple for notoriously hard to solve problems (by hand) and you'd be absolutely right.

In fact, the error of this approximation is of linear order with the step size, which is far from the best when talking about accuracy <d-cite key="iserlesFirstCourseNumerical2009"></d-cite>. Also, this might lead to considerable stability issues. Say, you're modelling a domain where heat transfer occurs and the solution is in some way oscillating. Then you would get vastly different results depending on your grid size. For example, if your "probing points" just so happen to coincide with two peaks of your solution, you would get a linear (or even worse, constant) slope by the FDM model - where actually the solution is harmonic. Of course, a trained user would probably chose a grid size way smaller than in this example, but this goes to show what order of accuracy can mean in a worst-case scenario.

On the other hand, the FDM gives a very universal way of tackling PDEs. You'd call it a jack of all trades, but master of none.